Introduce PEP for pip provenance (#1)
fridex/peps: pep-9999.rst

PEP: 9999

> Title: Recording provenance of installed packages

Reviewer: On second thought, maybe we shouldn't call it "provenance", which is a bit overloaded. Maybe "installation reports" is better. Better yet, maybe it could even be a new type of [in-toto attestation](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation).

Author: > On second thought, maybe we shouldn't call it "provenance", which is a bit overloaded. Maybe "installation reports" is better. 

Installation report can be confused with [pip's installation reports](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/reference/installation-report/).

> Better yet, maybe it could even be a new type of [in-toto attestation](https://github.com/in-toto/attestation).

Maybe we could add this directly to PEP as an example of usage, beside SBOM already mentioned.

Author: Fridolin Pokorny <fridolin.pokorny at datadoghq.com>, Trishank Karthik Kuppusamy <trishank.kuppusamy at datadoghq.com>, Donald Stufft <donald.stufft at datadoghq.com>, Ofek Lev <ofek.lev at ofek.lev@datadoghq.com datadoghq.com>
Sponsor: Paul Moore <p.f.moore at gmail.com>
PEP-Delegate:
Discussions-To: TODO
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 30-Jan-2002
Post-History:

Abstract
========

This PEP describes a way to record provenance of Python packages installed.
This record is created by an installer and is available to users in a form of a

> JSON file ``direct_url.json`` in ``.dist-info`` directory. This PEP extends

Author: Maybe it would worth to have this renamed:

```suggestion
JSON file ``provenance.json`` in ``.dist-info`` directory. This PEP extends
```

`PEP-610 <https://peps.python.org/pep-0610/>`_.

> Motivation

Reviewer: One important thing from our discussion: what does this proposal give you that installation reports already don't? One may argue that installation reports are too verbose and too specific to the OS/Python versions. However, I think the more significant philosophical difference is that you want these reports/provenance to be produced by default, since most end-users are not going to go through the trouble to explicitly produce them unless compelled. However, even if these reports are produced by default, the problem remains that old applications/containers are going to be missing these reports.

The other issue is whether something higher-level like Hatch might be better suited to producing this information, because then you can associate _applications_ with packages.

more accurate reports.

The motivation described in this PEP is a direct extension to `PEP-610
<https://peps.python.org/pep-0610/>`_. Besides stating information about
packages installed from an URL, installers SHOULD record information also
for packages installed from Python package indexes.

Examples
========

An example of a ``direct_url.json`` file in the ``.dist-info`` directory
alongside files stated in `PEP-376 <https://peps.python.org/pep-0376/>`_ and
further adjusted in `PEP-627 <https://peps.python.org/pep-0627/>`_. The
specified file stores a JSON describing artifact used to install a package as
well as its source.  The record is similar to ``direct_url.json`` described in
`PEP-610 <https://peps.python.org/pep-0610/>`_:

.. code-block: json

  {
    "archive_info": {
      "hash": "sha256=714ac14496c3e68c99c29b00845f7a2b85f3bb6f1078fd9f72fd20f0570002b2"
    },
    "url": "https://files.pythonhosted.org/packages/ed/35/a31aed2993e398f6b09a790a181a7927eb14610ee8bbf02dc14d31677f1c/packaging-23.0-py3-none-any.whl"
  }

The JSON document is stating the following entries:

* ``archive_info.hash`` MUST be present with a value of ``<hash-algorithm>=<expected-hash>``,

>   currently supported hash algorithm is only ``sha256``.

Reviewer: Could we also add `blake2b-256`? That is what [PEP 458](https://github.com/pypi/warehouse/pull/10870/files) plans to use after discussion with PyPA folks.

Author: Sounds reasonable, I'm not sure how the ``archive_info.hash`` should look like in such a case as ``<hash-algorithm>`` is directly part of its value (maybe comma separated?). This might also open discussion how it should look like in already existing support for ``direct_url.json``.
